Important Linux Commands 
 
File Administration Intervention cover: 
 
● ls: Lists all files and directories in the present working directory ● ls -R: Lists files in sub-directories as well ● ls -a: Shows hidden files ● ls -al: Lists files and directories with detailed information like permissions, size, owner, etc.  ● cd directoryname: Changes the directory ● cd ..: Moves one level up ● pwd: Displays the present working directory ● cat > filename: Creates a new file ● cat filename: Displays the file content ● cat file1 file2 > file3: Joins two files (file1 and file2) and stores the output in a new file (file3) ● touch filename: Creates or modifies a file ● rm filename: Deletes a file ● cp source destination: Copies files from the source path to the destination path ● mv source destination: Moves files from the source path to the destination path ● find / -name filename: Finds a file or a directory by its name starting from root ● file filename: Determines the file type ● less filename: Views the file content page by page ● head filename: Views the first ten lines of a file  ● tail filename: Views the last ten lines of a file  ● lsof: Shows which files are opened by which process. ● du -h --max-depth=1: Shows the size of each directory. Use --max-depth=1 to limit the output to the current directory and its immediate children. ● fdisk: Disk partition manipulation command. 
 
Directory Operations: 
 
● mkdir directoryname: Creates a new directory in the present working directory ● rmdir directoryname: Deletes a directory ● cp -r source destination: Copies directories recursively ● mv olddir newdir: Renames directories ● find / -type d -name directoryname: Finds a directory starting from root 
 
 
Process Operations: 
 
● ps: Displays your currently active processes ● top: Displays all running processes ● kill pid: Kills the process with given pid ● pkill name: Kills the process with the given name ● bg: Resumes suspended jobs without bringing them to foreground ● fg: Brings the most recent job to foreground ● fg n: Brings job n to the foreground ● renice +n [pid]: Change the priority of a running process. ● &>filename: Redirects both the stdout and the stderr to the file filename. ● 1>filename: Redirect the stdout to file filename.  ●  2>filename: Redirect stderr to file filename. 
 
File Permissions: 
 
● chmod octal filename: Change the permissions of file to octal, which can be between 0 (no permissions) to 7 (full permissions) ● chown ownername filename: Change file owner ● chgrp groupname filename: Change group owner 
 
Networking: 
 
• ping host: Ping a host and outputs results  • whois domain: Get whois information for domain  • dig domain: Get DNS information for domain  • netstat -pnltu: Display various network related information such as network connections, routing tables, interface statistics etc. ● ifconfig: Displays IP addresses of all network interfaces ● ssh user@host: Remote login into the host as user ● scp: Transfers files between hosts over ssh ● wget url: Download files from the web ● curl url: Sends a request to a URL and returns the response ● mtr domain: mtr combines the functionality of the traceroute and ping programs in a single network diagnostic tool. ● ss: Another utility to investigate sockets. It's a more modern alternative to netstat. ● nmap: Network exploration tool and security scanner. 
 
 
Archives and Compression: 
 
● tar cf file.tar files: Create a tar named file.tar containing files ● tar xf file.tar: Extract the files from file.tar ● gzip file: Compresses file and renames it to file.gz ● gzip -d file.gz: Decompresses file.gz back to file ● zip -r file.zip files: Create a zip archive named file.zip  ● unzip file.zip: Extract the contents of a zip file 
 
Text Processing: 
 
● grep pattern files: Search for pattern in files ● grep -r pattern dir: Search recursively for pattern in dir ● command | grep pattern: Pipe the output of command to grep for searching ● echo 'text': Prints text ● sed 's/string1/string2/g' filename: Replaces string1 with string2 in filename ● diff file1 file2: Compares two files and shows the differences ● wc filename: Count lines, words, and characters in a file  ● awk: A versatile programming language for working on files.  ● sed -i 's/string1/string2/g' filename: Replace string1 with string2 in filename. The -i option edits the file in-place. ● cut -d':' -f1 /etc/passwd: Cut out the first field of each line in /etc/passwd, using colon as a field delimiter. 
 
System Info: 
 
● date: Show the current date and time ● cal: Show this month's calendar ● uptime: Show current uptime ● w: Display who is online ● whoami: Who you are logged in as ● uname -a: Show kernel information ● df -h: Disk usage in human readable format ● du -sh: Disk usage of current directory in human readable format ● free -m: Show free and used memory in MB ● df: Shows disk usage ● du: Shows directory space usage ● free: Show memory and swap usage ● whereis app: Show possible locations of app 
Package Installations: • sudo apt-get update: Updates package lists for upgrades  • sudo apt-get upgrade: Upgrades all upgradable packages  • sudo apt-get install pkgname: Install pkgname  • sudo apt-get remove pkgname: Removes pkgname ● pip install packagename: Install a Python package. ● pip uninstall packagename: Uninstall a Python package. ● pip freeze > requirements.txt: Freeze the installed packages into a requirements file. ● pip install -r requirements.txt: Install packages from a requirements file. 
 
System Monitoring and Performance: 
 
● iostat: Reports Central Processing Unit (CPU) statistics and input/output statistics for devices, partitions, and network filesystems. ● vmstat: Reports information about processes, memory, paging, block IO, traps, disks, and CPU activity. ● htop: An interactive process viewer for Unix systems. It's a more user-friendly alternative to top. 
 
Search and Find: 
 
● locate filename: Find a file by its name. The database updated by updatedb command. ● whereis programname: Locate the binary, source, and manual page files for a command. ● which commandname: Shows the full path of (shell) commands. 
 
Compression / Archives: 
 
● tar -cvf archive.tar dirname/: Create a tar archive. ● tar -xvf archive.tar: Extract a tar archive. ● tar -jcvf archive.tar.bz2 dirname/: Create a compressed bz2 archive. ● tar -jxvf archive.tar.bz2: Extract a bz2 archive


welcome